---
title: "What are Machine Learning Algorithms?"
date: 2019-03-05 01:48:00 -0500
categories: [AI]
tags: [learnings]
---

In today’s world, machine learning (ML) algorithms are everywhere. They help you pick the next perfect movie for date night, they help you navigate when you’re out in the wilderness, and arguably, most common of all, they’re the things powering Google when you get curious.

With algorithms being so prevalent, it’s important to bring to light that not all algorithms are equal and the same. In fact, what the heck is an algorithm? Wikipedia refers to them as “an unambiguous specification of how to solve a class of problems”, which is pretty spot on in my opinion. By this definition, a couple lines of code that helps you do arithmetic is as much an algorithm as the ones that are at the centerpiece of autonomous vehicles.

But what about Machine Learning Algorithms? Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence (AI). Yes, I do mean robots. As a term though, machine learning emerged around 2013 (according to Google Trends) and it’s generally used today to encapsulate methods and theories that process and use the large and readily amounts of data available to find, determine and explain natural phenomena. In fact, if you search Big Data or Data Science in Google Trends, you’ll see that both terms emerged around the same time as well. Therefore a machine learning algorithm is one that just operates within this space and has that particular goal.

So now that we’re aware of this definition, what ML algorithms are out there? Honestly, there are too many to count and name. With more and more being developed and tweaked everyday and being mostly kept under lock and key, it’s almost impossible to accurately say how many are in active use today. However, almost all algorithms can be classified into three classes: supervised learning, unsupervised learning, and reinforcement learning.

Supervised learning is when we feed labeled data into a computer and try to create a model that represents relationships seen in the data. It is perhaps the most common and readily used today. In fact, all high-school students have likely done supervised learning. When have I ever done machine learning you may ask? For me, it was when my teacher asked me to plot a table of height versus weight and draw a line through it. This is supervised learning because I had a table of data points where one variable was related to another. With a height, I had a corresponding labeled value of weight and by drawing a line I created a model. If you then gave me a height of a friend, I could tell you what I think a weight should be using the line. Now, let’s say I threw in age as another variable. How would you graph that? It would look pretty complicated because now we’re working in 3 dimensions. As you add more variables, problems get more complicated which is why we’ve developed special algorithms to better solve them.

Unsupervised learning is when we forego establishing a model relating one variable to another within our fed data. Instead we ask the computer to see if it can come up with any relationships that could exist on its own. For example, let’s say we’re a t-shirt company and we want to create t-shirts of 3 different sizes. How big or small should we make each t-shirt such that it caters to as many people as possible when there’s so much variation in body type. With unsupervised learning algorithms, we would ask the computer to create groups based on how similar each of our weight and height data points are to an ideal point. How we define “similar” and “ideal point” are some of the criterias we need to specify, and there are many algorithms out there that would take these requirements and calculate things depending on the overall use case.

Lastly, reinforcement learning. This one is a bit removed from the other two types. It involves a computer finding an optimal state or set of actions to achieve a reward given certain rules and boundaries. So instead of an algorithm trying to predict certain outcomes or finding similarities between data points, reinforcement learning is more about learning a process. What application does this have then? In another article, Google’s AlphaGo algorithm was described. As its base, this is an example of reinforcement learning because the computer is learning and applying which states have a higher probability of winning. When an opponent makes a move, the algorithm asks itself, “based on the current condition, what’s the best move I know of that leads to victory?” If the ultimate outcome is a win then the steps it took get reinforced and are applied more often. As one can imagine, there are many other examples including teaching how a robot moves in its environment as well.

In summary, all algorithms today are in some form or another a supervised learning problem, an unsupervised learning problem, or a reinforcement learning problem. Deciding which category of machine learning algorithm to use depends on the data you have and the objective you’re trying to achieve. We provide a general overview here to spark your curiosity and learning.